Authoritative; Server that actually holds the DNS Records for a domain.
Non-Authoritative; When you query a DNS server that doesn’t own record but has cached it from a previous query the answer it gives is non-authoritative
Recursive is when the client asks DNS server, and then it knows it/how to resolve it
Iterative is when client asks the DNS server, and if it doesn’t know, it asks other DNS server step by step. First being the root, then the TLD until it finds the authoritative server.

Secure Shell; CLI. Port 22 TCP, Compatible with more systems; UNIX, LINUX, etc. And can connect to network appliances (switches, routers and firewalls) SSH can be used as the SFTP (secure File transfer Protocol) 

SSH host Key; identified by a public/private key pair referred to as host key. 

SSH client Authentication; Methods for client to authenticate to SSH
-Username/password; Client enters Credentials 
-Public Key Authentication; Each remote users public key is added to a list of keys authorized for each local account on the SSH server
-Kerberos; client submits TGT obtained when user logged onto workstation to the server using GSSAPI. SSH server contacts the TGS to validate the credential for SSO.

Telnet; Telnet is a both protocol and terminal emulation software tool that transmits shell commands and output between a client and the remote hosts in order to support telnet Access
Telnet Daemon listens on TCP port 23. Telnet is not encrypted therefore vulnerable to packet sniffing and replay.

RDP; (remote desktop protocol) 
GUI. runs on TCP 3389.
RDP should be also configured to require NLA. (Network Level Authentication) NLA protects the RDP server against DoS attacks. Without NLA, The system configured a desktop before the user logs on. A malicious user can create multiple pending connects to try to crash system.
RDPRA; Mitigates against DDos Attacks 
SAW: Secure Administrative Workstation; A dedicated machine only for administrative access, Low attack surface.

ND; replaces ARP in Ipv6
ND;  uses RS and RA 
RS Hosts asks
RA Router Answers
ND is used in SLAAC. SLAAC sends RA to configure automatic addressing.

NTS; Network Time Security
NTP; Uses atomic clock. Udp port 123. Stratum 0
PTP; More precise than NTP. uses satellites.

DHCP AGENT/RELAY; Agent is the DHCP server. To set up relay u set up the router to do it
IP helper; Forwards UDP packets, can forward dhcp, ntp, tftp, etc.

FHRP; Redundancy for Routers. There alot of variations of FHRP like HSRP and VRRP.
HSRP; Cisco, Uses the term Active and Standby Routers. Uses VIP. Higher priority -> selected active router 
GLBP; allows for active/active load balancing config.
VRRP; Open standard, Uses term Master and Backup Routers. Uses VIP but it doesn't require for unique IP addresses to be configured so it’s better for saving IP addresses. Higher priority = master
MTBF; Expected life expectancy 
MTTF; Non repairable components
MTTR; Mean time to repair.
RTO; Maximum Down time
RPO; Maximum data loss
WRT; Work time objective, extra time for backups.
Clustering; Allows multiple processing nodes for redundancy.
Active/passive; Performance not affected in failovers
Active/Active; Both nodes processing connections. Performance degraded if a node fails

BCP; Businesses recovery plans
threaten the work sites.
BIA; Business Impact and risks.
Tabletop; Teams Discuss and work through scenarios.

Federation; allows networks to be accessible to more than one network. Ex; U Sign in to Google, now u can log in to google docs/youtube.
SP (service provider) trust w/ IDP (identity provider) 
Client requests and authenticates. IDP token signed. Enabling federation. The key is stored in a SAML. (XML) and the communications are established using HTTPs and the SOAP simple object access protocol; It’s a messaging protocol used for communication between applications. Common ; HTTPs.

Kerberos; One method of allowing SSO. 
Ex; kerberos is used for SSO in AD.
Kerberos has 3 parts; client, server and KDC
KDC has two parts;
Authentication Server; Authenticates the User
TGS; Once Authenticated, KDC gives TGT (Ticket) which allows access to resources and enables SSO

TCP handshake
Handshake; SYN <-> Client, SYN/ACK  <-> Server, Generate sequence number (random) ACK <-> Client, ESTABLISHED State. (increment sequence number by 1
RST; To end connection abruptly. abnormal.
TCP Teardown
Client Sends FIN, Enters FIN-WAIT1
Last State; TIME-WAIT then client closes connection

UDP; Connectionless. The header is 8 bytes. TCP is 20 bytes. Protocol number 17.

Spine and Leaf; supporting east-west traffic and SDN, overlay networks.
Spine; Backbone of top tier distribution switches
Leaf; Access Switches. Uses ToR.
Spine and leaf topologies are loop free. Uses ECMP to distribute traffic between links
ToR Switches; Leaf Switches. High speed omg. 10/40 GbE 
SAN; Storage Area networking. Isolated from the main network to avoid performance issues. 
Accessed only by servers. SAN can integrate different types of storage technologies; RAID, tape libraries, tape drives, etc. supports different types of SAN fabrics
Fibre Channel; Uses Fiber Optic Cables but doesn’t rely on it. Has 3 components;
Initiator; HBA Host Bus Adapter transceiver to let you access to the storage area network.
Target; Storage drives. Includes; RAID arrays, Tape libraries and tape drives. Divided into logical volumes. Uniquely identified via LUNs 64 bit identifier
FC switch; Interconnection between initiator and target

Initiator And targets can be identifiers are called WWN. 64 bits similar to MAC addresses WWNN; can allocate WWN. WWPN; Identifier for ports. 

Converged Ethernet; Encapsulates Fibre Channel Over Ethernet Packets. 
FC-oE; Needs 10/40/100G Adapters that combine NIC and HBA, ← referred to as CNA 
RCoE; NVMe over RDMA better than NVMe/FC as it separates CPU and storage utilization.

TCP/IP; iSCSI tunnels data over IP network.
iSCSI works with ordinary ethernet unlike Converged ethernet. Its the alternative.
NVMe-TCP; Works over standard traffic (bad)
! a san is never in the production network as this can affect latency and bad for critical workload.

IaaS = gives the server, mhm balancers red, SANs and the essentials of building the servers 
PaaS; gives you the platform to build the softwre
SaaS; Software, ready to use 
Public; Hosted by CSP. Multitenancy 
Private; Exclusive, Owned by you, Privacy and secure
Hosted Private; Hosted by CSP. But you're the only host
Hybrid; Mix of public and private. Flexible.

Cloud connectivity; 
Internet VPN; tenants can configure a VPN for their VPC. High latency. And cost-effective
Site to site, Client to site and virtual customer gateway
Direct Connect/colocation; Direct connection to the cloud, lower latency, but high cost
Transit Gateway; 1;1 Connection the transit gateway acts as the Internet gateway. Other VPC connection. Complex to set up, but makes things convenient 

Elasticity; Handle real time changes
Scalability; The ability to increase resources/costs linearly as customer demand grows
CDN; caching systems for high traffic web and apps improves performance by distributing content across geographically closer to the user 

Cloud gateway; How a VPC can Communicate with other VPCs/Other subnets or the Internet
Internet Gateway; Two way, 1;1 mapping, uses the pool of CSP or your own public pool.
NAT gateway; One way, allows for inbound connection but can’t allow outbound connection
VPN;Connection between VPC via a VPN or using CSP features 

Cloud instances; NFV = Virtualized Appliances. 
3 parts of NFV; VNF, NFVI and MANO
VNF = Deploys the VMs
NFVI = Allocates resources to the VNFs
MANO = Positions the workflow and performs the forwarding 

Cloud security; Enforce rules to accounts, VPC, subnets and instances.
L3; Filtering IP, or TCP/UDP ports 
L4; Stateful filtering 
L7; Examine the headers; Ex; HTTP deny 

ZTA; zero touch Provisioning. inherently distrust nodes/services they need to get authorized/ authenticated first to make requests.

SASE; Combines SD-WAN and SSE,
SDWAN; connects remote sites 
SSE; CASB, and ZTA are examples of SSE.

SDN; Cloud services require constant provisioning and deprovisioning. Using automation and server instances too. Software Defined Networking is a model to do this
Properties of SDN;
Central Policy Management; Single “source of truth” on how the business should operate. Policies enforced 
Transport agnostic; can use Ethernet, satellites, cellular, leased lines and Wi-Fi
Zero Touch Provisioning; No need for manual configuration. Can automate usign scripts .
Application Aware; Can identify Traffic Types and prioritize them (voice, video, and IoT) 
SDN architecture
Application Layer; Defines policies
Infrastructure Layer; Handles the forwarding of the traffic 
Management Plane; Monitors traffic conditions
SDN Controller/Control layer; exposes APIs
Northbound-API Application → Controller.
Southbound-API; Controller → Infrastructure

Controllers; WLC.
-Controls Light weight APs by making them auto config SSID/channel
WEP; Uses RC4. 
WPA; Uses RC4. with TKIP replaces WEP
WPA2; Uses AES/can use TKIP and CCMP. replaces WPA
Open Wifi Sent without Cryptography
WPA3; uses AES galois and GCMP
Wifi Enhanced open; Encrypted traffic in Open Wifis 
Captive Portal; Redirect before joining open WI-FI terms and conditions

Demarc/MPOE; Termination between ISP and Customer 
CPE; customers premises equipment
T-carrier; Digitized Voice Traffic
DS0; Each channel 64 Kbps
DS1/T1; 20 DS0 = 1.544 Mbps (multiplexed) 

DSL; Traffic between Telephone Lines.
ADSL; Asymmetric.
ASDL2;24 Mbps DL, 1.5/2.5 Mbps UL.
SDSL; Symmetric DSL. same UL and DL 
Splitter; Prevents noise traffic between voice and DSL modem.
Cable internet; Traffic between CatV; Often called HFC. because they combine coax links to cpe.
Cable internet connects to customer router via ethernet -> Coax Connects to WAN port/ Coax lines link multiple premises to CMTS -> Fiber backbone -> ISP.
Standards;
DOCSIS; DL 38 Mbps north america, Europe is 50 Mbps DL.
DOCSIS 3; Allows multiple plexed channels higher B/W 

FTTx; Defines fiber optic standards
FTTC and VDSL;

Point-To-Point; Encapsulation that works at data link layer. (layer 2) PPP is used to encapsulate serial communications.
GRE; Generic Routing Encapsulation. Works at Layer 3. IP protocol 47. 
Outer GRE; Has it’s 
Link aggregation; bonding two links together
NIC Teaming; from the hosts end, this can be called NIC Teaming. At switch end. It can be called port aggregation and is referred to by Cisco as an EtherChanel The term “bonding” is also widely substituted for Aggregation
802.3/ad/802.ax ; Link aggregation standard.
802.3ad also defines the LACP 
LACP; used to detect configuration errors and recover from the failure of one physical links.

MTU; Standard Ethernet frame has a maximum length of 1,518 bytes. Excluding the preamble.
Each frame has an 18 byte header.
6 byte destination and source MAC address fields.
4-byte error checking field
2 byte Ether Type field
So the maximum size of data payload is 1,500 bytes.
Jumbo frames is one that supports a data payload up to 9,216 bytes.



SSH; remote connection secure can be used with SFTP

STP; 802.1D; Prevents switching loops
BPDU; Switches Exchange Information for STP.
-Designated Ports; Forward traffic Down Root bridge
-Root Ports; Forward Traffic UP Rootbridge
-Blocked Ports; Disabled ports, ports that could cause Loops are disabled.

RSTP; 802.1w; prevents switching loops – with faster convergence. STP has downtime of 30-50 seconds while RSTP has 1-3 Seconds Downtime

ECMP; Spine and leaf uses this to distribute traffic between links to spine and leaf is loop free


VLANs; Logical dividing of IP networks, Different groups of computers in the same cabling attached switch. Separate broadcast domain.
Ex; VoIP handsets VLAN to decrease interference and give priority.
Commands;
Vlan 16
Name vlan16
Interface range gigabitEthernet0/1-13
Switchport access vlan 16 
No vlan <- deletes vlan.
PORT tagging;
Untagged ports; ports that only participates in single VLAN cam be configured as untagged
Tagged
VoIp - Voice over IP. meaning voice data is sent in packets not like circuit switching


RAS; Remote Access Server.
Site-to-Site;
Host-to-Host;
Client-To-Site; 
AH; Authenticates and Integrity by calculating ICV.
ESP; Encrypts the payload
ICV; Integrity to make sure IP payload has not been modified… Checksum for AH ( mandatory) and ESP (option) ESP has 3 headers, A header, Trailer ( extra padding for cryptography) and ICV. But unlike AH, ESP excludes the IP header when calculating ICV
Transport mode; Only encrypts payload but not IP header, meaning can see src and dst.
Tunnel mode; Encrypts whole packet. Payload and IP header. Hides real IP src and dst.

IKE; Authenticates by keys.
Phase 1; Establishes and identifies by using PSK or digital certificate
Phase 2; Uses secure tunnel made in Phase 1, Chooses what key size/cipher to use in AH Or ESP


L2TP/; Layer 2 tunneling protocol. IPSec.

MultiHoming; Practice of connecting a single network or host to two or more ISPs or networks.
MOBIKE; IKEv2. Allows IPSec VPN clients and servers to change either IP addresses without dropping the vpn connection
PoP; Point of Presence; location where ISP place where other users can connect to it
IXP; Theres no Single company that owns the traffic Flow. Internet eXchange Point is where CDNs, ISPs, and big companies meetup for peering.

Zigbee; Low power, low cost used in IoT communication. uses AES 

MLD; Allows nodes to join a multicast group and discover whether members of a group are present on a local subnet
ND; Neighboring Discovery used in Ipv6, same functions as ARP in Ipv4.
IGMP; Used in Ipv4 to manage group memberships. (Multicast) 

Fragmentation; If packet exceeded MTU (1518 bytes), it will fit it into manageable pieces of the data link layer frame.

Out-Of-Bound Management OOB; Separate tunnel for management more secure than Inbound

Authentication; 
IAM; Principle that is commonly implemented in modern networks. Identification, authentication, authorization and accounting.

Windows authentication
LSA; Local Security Authority Compares Credentials to the SAM. Security Accounts Manager.

Windows Network signin. LSA can pass the credentials for authentication to network services

Crossover cable; use if legacy, 
Straight Through cable; use if AUTO-MDIX is compatible
Switches;
Microsegmentation; each port, different collision domain

RDPRA; RDP restricted admin
Jump-Box; An administrative Computer only, restricted to outside access.

PoP; Location where ISP Place
CMTS; Location where CATV termination
HFC; Hybrid Fiber Coax, CATV uses this, copper in homes but fiber to for CMTS
DOCSIS; The standard for 
DSLAM; Location for DSL termination
Splitter; divides and separates channels Ex; telephone and DSL modem separation.

LSA; Local Security Authority; Windows authentication compared submitted credential to hash stored in SAM 

SAM; Security Accounts Manager database hash which is part of registry.

NTLM; If no Kerberos, this is legacy for authentication

EAP: Framework for authentication protocol 

(802.1x) Has a lot of methods for security.

TGS; ticket granting
802.1x; Uses AAA. (Authenticate, Authorization, Accounting) uses EAP

SSO; Kerberos provides SSO;
Kerberos;Security Protocol for SSO. 

KDC; Key Distribution center; there are two services; Authentication and ticket granting.
Authentication; Authenticating user logon request
Ticket Granting; To access resources within the domain.
Client requests a ticket (TGS; Ticket Granting Service) to grant access a target application
802.11h

802.1w / RSTP; Prevent switching loops, while converging fast. 
802.1d / STP ; Slower than RSTP / 802.1w
RSTP; 1-6 sec 
STP; 50-30 sec

NAC; Provides the means of using an EAP method when a device connects to an Ethernet switch port.
PAM; Pluggable Authentin ation Module

Dynamic Routing protocols; Allows Routers exchange information about known networks and possible paths. Best routes given.
EIGRP; Cisco-proprietary, Distance-Vector, Flat unlike OSPF that's hierarchical.
OSPF;Link-state vector, hierarhical. 
Area 0/Backbone; Appliances must connect to area 0 (invisible to them, but still logiocally connected) to know every location of other appliances
RIP; Oldest Routing Protocol -> Evalutes by hops.
BGP; Border Gateway Protocol. This protocol is unique, It connects between ASes (Autonomous Systems), Unlike OSPF, EIGRP, ISIS, and RIP. which is within an AS.
802.11a; 54 Mbps. 5 Ghz, uses OFDM for signal modulation
802.11b; 11 Mbps. 2.4 Ghz, Uses CCK and DSSS for signal modulation
802.11g; 54 Mbps. both 5 Ghz and 2.4 Ghz 
can support 802.11b
802.11n; 72 Mbps per upstream also known as WiFi-4; New features; MIMO and Channel Bonding.
802.11ac; 2,167 Mbps, 5 Ghz DL MU-MIMO 
802.11ax; 10G, 2.4, 5 Ghz, 6 Hz, UL MU-MIMO Uses OFDMA which divides a channel into Resource Units (RU)
Smaller RU; Lower data rate but also allows more devices to connect
Higher RU; Higher Data rate

CSMA/CD; To cope with contention, sends CTS
And then all devices stop transmitting traffic

2.4 Ghz; Better penetration materials, allowing for longer ranges, less individual channels.
5 Ghz; Less efficient penetrating materials, higher data at shorter ranges, more individual channels.

Cellular Technologies;
Find nearest cell or base. Range; 5 Miles ; 8 Kilometers
4G/LTE; 4G theoretical rate is 300 Mbps but 20 Mbps real world. LTE-A; 90 mbps
5G; Massive MIMO, Needs hundreds of small antennas
Instead of a large big one. Theoretical rate; 20G; realworld; 300 mbps

Satelite;
Satellite are expanding due to not requiring DSL or cable lines, especially in rural areas. uses microwaves
GEO; Geostationary Satellites, Satellites are far on the orbit Very High latency. Installed using VSAT dishes, Satellites doesn’t need to be realigned
LEO; Better B/W. Satellites are closer. However, dish antenna needs to be realigned periodically as satellites move
GPS; Calculate location. Needs multiple signals from satellites to triangulate position.

Dualband adapters; 2.4 Ghz and 5 Ghz have separate MAC addresses. 
SSID; The network name you see when connecting to a network. If broadcasted u can see it on list but if not, you’ll have to enter it manually.
BSS;Group of Clients connected to the same AP
BSSID; AP’s Unqiue MAC address radio, Unique Identifier of the BSS
if a client connects to an SSID underpinned by multiple BSSs, it tries to determine which BSSID offers the best signal.
DS; Distribution System can be used to network multiple Access points.
ESS; group of Basic Service Sets that are all configured on the same SSID and security information
Each BSS uses a different channel within each frequency band. When deployed like this the network name is more properly called an ESSID, An ESSID has the same format as an SSID

QoS; how data should be prioritized over the network;
Three planes of QoS
Control plane; how the data should be prioritized and where to switch it
Data Plane; does the actual switching of data.
Management Plane; Monitors traffic conditions.
Traffic shaper; Ensures the priority traffic gets prioritized
Traffic policing; Drops packet when a traffic reaches exceeded threshold

DiffServ; Priority for L3, in the type of service field in Ipv4, for Ipv6 in the traffic class. Diffserv has a DSCP value.
DSCP value; Diffserv value on how to treat a packet
Ex;  voip; 46 dscp value, email 0 dscp = higher value; prioritize.

802.1p; Priority for L2 for ports and vlans (802.1Q) defines tagging with 802.1Q sets value between 0 to 7
CoS; Tagging mechanism ( drop , prioritize, queue ) to identify frame and or packet glass. for both DiffServ and 802.1P. It’s a classification concept.

MPLS
RED; Random Early Detection. Congestion avoidance / queue management system to avoid congestion from happening in the mean time/future

Ipfix; IPFIX is an IETF-standard protocol used to export network flow information from devices to a collector for traffic analysis.
Netflow; cisco, flowing data.

Iterative Lookups;
Recursive lookup; client contacts DNS server. If doesn’t find it contacts root server. 
If DNS that doesn’t know the answer, and then asks roots, it’s iterative; What it does know the

Iterative; dns resolver asks each server step by step each server gives the best info it knows (a referral to another server) 
And then it stores it in a cache so the DNS server already knows it

Broadcast; Sends all packet frame to all in broadcast domain
Unicast; 
Multicast;
Anycast;

CAM: mac addresses
SFD: Start Frame delimeter.
VSLM: How many IP addresses that needs to be saved/necessary needed to save space
Kerberos; authentication service for sso.
KDC; Key Distribution Center
RFC1918: standards for private addressing

Dual stack; Using Both ipv6 and ipv4 simultaneously 

Tunelling;
6to4; uses prefix
6RD; Enhanced 6 to 4. improvement; Managed ISP prefix and speed
Teredo; for windows only
Miredo; Open source tunneling for teredo for Unix and Linux Systems
Gre; Mature way of tunelling.
Nat64: Uses special Prefix 2001 To Forward Ipv4 then strips it at destination.


NAT: Translates Private IP/Public IP
Static Nat; 1:1 Mapping. 1 private and 1 public. useful to connection requiring inbound connections 
Dynamic NAT; Pool of IP addresses 
PAT; Uses port to uniquely identify a Device 

VyOS; VyOS is a network operating system designed to be managed almost entirely via a command-line interface (CLI). Think of it as a Linux-based OS that turns a machine (physical or virtual) into a full-featured router/firewall.

RIP; Distance Vector. Limit 15 hopcount.
Area 0; Backbone of OSPF, where all  routers connect, but invisible to the 
Edge Router; On the perimeter of the network. frames LAN/WAN
PE; Premises Side of Edge Router
CE; Customer side of edge router

AD; Administrative Distance.. One of the Metrics routers use to forward packet. 
Lower AD Is more trusted and secure

AH; Authentication Header (I always get those mixed up lol) 
HA; High availability cluster, for load balancing and redundancy.
CDP; Cisco Proprietary Protocol, for device discovery. such as discovering AP’s and roters

AS: A Network controlled by single owner/organization.
IGP; Interior of an AS
EGP; Exterior of an AS.

DMZ; perimeter network, segregates the “private network”

NFV; Virtualization for appliances.
VNF; Virtualization 
NFVI; Allocation of resources
MANO; Management for NFV

SIP; Session Initiaton Protocol 

FQDN; Fully Qualified Domain Name; DNS
PDU; data unit Defines OSI Layer
PDU; Power Distribution Unti

TCP; Transmission control protocol, Protocol number 6. Connection-oriented
UDP; User Diagram Protocol, Protocol number 18, Connectionless.
RST; Force end TCP / SYN ack process
SMB; Server Message Block
DHCPv6; DHCP For Ipv6 Stateful

RDP; Remote Desktop Protocol
MySQL; port 1433 Oracles SQL
VNC ; Alternative to RDP, 
APC; Angled. 8 degrees. Green APC IS TIGHTER
UPC; Polished, Blue. 
DHCP Relay; Server that gives out the DHCP
DHCP Scope; 

Multicast is used where a single source to multiple interfaces, the prefix being ff00 (can vary due to flags and scope)
Example of scope;
Ff02; Link local
Ff01; all interfaces have the same node.
MLD manages the group memberships, and allows discovery of the nodes in the multicast;
Ex; DHCPv6 scope = ff02::1:2, ff02::5 <- OSPF, ff02::2 <- all router, ff02::1 <- all nodes.

ISO; Creator of OSI Model
IEEE 802.11; Wireless Networkinh
IEE 802.3 - Ethernet Standards by categories
IEEE 802.11 - WiFi Standards
IEEE 802.1X - Tagging/Tagging
RFC 1918 - Private addresses
RFC 3927 - Link Local Address Configuring
ICANN; controls DNS
IANA; Provisions IP addresses.
FTTH; Fiber to The Hone
APIPA - 169.254.0.0/16, Automatic.
MLD - Multicast Discovery for IPv6
ND - Neighbour Discovery. Replaces ARP For IPv6
ND ; arp but for ipv6
SLAAC - Stateless, Automatic addressing for IPv6 Uses RA’s. 

DHCPv6 - Stateful, meaning theres more options. For IPv6.
IPAM - Ip Address Management
RS; router solicition 
RA; Router Advertisement
STATELESS; Doesn't preserve information
STATEFUL; Preserves information
ICMP;  Protocol Number number 1, tests connectivity. if blocked it doesn't allow it to be tested

Multicast is used where a single source to multiple interfaces, the prefix being ff00 (can vary due to flags and scope)
Example of scope;
Ff02; Link local
Ff01; all interfaces have the same node.
MLD manages the group memberships, and allows discovery of the nodes in the multicast;
Ex; DHCPv6 scope = ff02::1:2, ff02::5 <- OSPF, ff02::2 <- all router, ff02::1 <- all nodes.
FE80 - LINK-LOCAL
FF02 - Multicast prefix for ipv6
EUI-64 - PUT FFFE IN THE MIDDLE OF MAC TO MAKE IT INTERFACE IPV4
Dual-stack; most efficient runs both simultaneously 
NAT64; uses specific prefix to convert IPv4 to Ipv6 
The prefix for NAT64; 64:ff9b::/96 <-- then strips it

Tunelling
TEREDO - Windows for Tunelling
MIREDO - LINUX, UNIX For tunneling
both encapsulates 
Alternative; GRE, A more mature approach.

DTLS - UDP TLS.
TLS - Transport Layer Security 
CA - Digital Certificate
PTP - Precision Time Protocol 
NTP - Network Time Protocol.
Stratum - part of NTP to correctly set time NTP is UTC Based
ThunderBird - email for firefox
Demarc - Boundary between ISP and customer
POTS - Legacy. VoIP Is better
IMAP - Receives 143. Secure 993
POP3 - Receives. 110. Secure 995
SMTP - Sends. Sends mail by using dns to lookup the mx record listing an ip address for remote recipient and establishes connection with remote domain.
Port 25. Secure 465 (USES TLS) 
Area 0 - Also known as backbone for OSPF not seen. Where all Networks conenct. 

Ipv6 addressing;
Global Unicast; routable on the internet.
-Prefix 2000:3//
-the two indicates that it’s a global unicast.
-The next 45 bits is the global routing prefix
-next 16 bits is the subnet bits. To specify what subnets allows 65,535 subnets,
-Interface ID
EUI-64;Unique MAC address to make interface ID in IPv6. /64. Steps;
Put FFFE in the middle on the Mac address
Flip the 7th bit, (if its 0 then make it 1, if its 1 make it 0)
Link-Local; Inter networking. Only works in a local subnet; Prefix; fe80::/1 the next 54 bits are set to 0, and then 64 bits for the interface ID.
Multicast; A single source to multiple network interfaces
Prefix ff00::/ (can vary due to flags/determining the scope) examples for ; ff02; for link-local, ff01; node local (all interfaces on same node, ff02::5; OSPF routers)
Broadcast is not in IPv6 as Hosts use an appropriate multicast address/well known broadcast address  for any given situation as shown above.
MLD; Manages Multicast memberships. Discovers the presence of multicast listeners.


RTP - Real time Protocol. UDP. How data flows in real time
SIP - Initiates UDP. Protocol 5060, 5061 
QoS - Router option. To set Priority and low priority sort by 6 bits DSCP. 

SME - Small Medium enterprise network 

VIP - Virtual IP address, common in Redundancy to set only 1 address for 2 devices also unique mac address
Allows first Hop Redundacy if router/default gateway breaks

FHRP - FIRST HOP REDUNDANCY 
VRRP; Virtual IP 

DKIM; Key Signing Zone. signing an email that its authorized.
SPF; Prevents Spoofed emails.
DKIM; Ensures email has not been tampered

PTR; for reverse lookup zone, Reversed
CNAME; alias
A; Ipv4  
AAAA; Ipv6
DNSSEC Help to mitigate against spotting and poisoning attacks on DNS servers by validation process for DNS response, Validates the records held by a name server.
DN; Distinguised Name.
DNS ENCRYPTION TO prevent on path threat actor tampering with responses DNS: 
DNS Over TLS, DoT, uses tls to validate the resolvers name server’s CA (DIGITAL CERTIFICATE)  
DNS Over HTTPS, DoH, Validates CA and encrypts dns by Encapsulating HTTP secure packets. ( 6.5.10 ) 
SRV; Contains service name and port on which a particular application is hosted. 
MX; Mail Services

PoE; Powewr over Ethernet
802.at ; 15 watts
802.3at ; 25 watts 
802.3bt ; 50 watts
PoE Power Over Ethernet. Removes the necessity to use any power cables. 
SIEM: 
C: Confidentiality
I: Integrity
A: Availability

NAC ; Network Access Control; Authenticating endpoints to not get exploited by rogue services or devices; A basic NAC can be put configuring port security configurations

DUAL-polarization
Polarization; transceive and receive

Demarc/MPOE; Termination point between provider and ur premisess/customer
Any cable problems arising from other side of demarc point are ur responsibility/custoemr
CPE; Customer Premises Equipment. Devices installed by customers

T carrier; Enabled voice traffic to be digitized for transport around the core of the telecommunications network.
T carrier is a TDM that assigned time slots for each circuit (channel) each 64 kbps channel provides enough BW for digitized voice call

T1/DS1; 1.544 Mbps = 24 channels multiplexed for more bandwidth.
T1 Typically use High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC) or Point-To-Point Protocol

DSL; A technology for transferring data over voice grade telephone lines. A DSL connects to RJ-11. A splitter is installed on each phone point to prevent noise fro maffecting the dsl modem and voice.

ADSL; Asymmetric UL and DL. ADSL2; 25 Mbps DL 2.5 Mbps UL 
SDSL; Symmetric UL and DL 

Cable Internet;
A cable internet connection is usually available along the cable access TV (CATV) these networks are often described as HFC Hybrid Fiber Coax. Because they combine fiber optic core network with coax links to CPE.

Coax links all the premises in a street, CMTS. which routes data traffic via fiber backbone to ISP’s POP
DOCSIS; 38 Mbps DL (north america) 50 Mbos DL ( europe) and UL 27 Mbps.
DOCSIS 2; Allows for multiplexed channels to achieve higher bandwidth

FTTx <- term for fiber optic
FTTC and VDSL
FTTC: means copper to the premises through a communications cabinet. 
FTTC uses VDSL which stands for Very High Speed DSL it allowed for both symmetric and asymmetric modes. Over 300m (1,000 feet) 
VDSL; Asymmetric 52 Mbps DL, 6 UL mnps
VDSL2; Symmetric 100 Mbps BiDi (100m/300m)

FTTP; Fiber all the way to premises.
Full fiber connection type is implemented as a PON. in a PON a single fiber cable is run from PoP to an OLT located in a street cabinet. From OLT. Splitters direct each subscribers traffic over a shorter length of fiber to an ONT installed at Customers premises.
The ONT is connected to the customers router using RJ45 Ethernet Patch cord.

VDSL; 52 mbps. 
VDSLv2; 100 mbps BiDi
ADSL; Asymmetrical DL and UL. slowest

DSL; RJ-11 port. 
DSLAM; terminates DSL lines from many customers
DB-9(RS-232); Modem serial mode used in aux port
T.Digitizer; legacy for VoIP
T-Carrier; Enabled voice traffic to be digitized. Uses TDM. Protocol assigns each circuit or channel a time slot. Each 64 KBS provides enough bandwidth for voice calls
64 KBS; DS0 or Narrow band link
1.544 Mbps; Full duplex digital connection DS1 or T1 Enough for Voice and data.

T1 leased lines typically use High-Level Data Link Control HDLC or Point to point protocol PPP
PPP/HDLC 
HDLC; Bit Oriented Synchronous Protocol
PPP; Data link protocol, is designated for point to point links.
Both are Layer 2 WAN protocols used for point-to-point links (router-to-router).


TACACS; Tcp 49 best for administration. Cisco Propietary 
RADIUS; udp 1812/1813 best for 802.1x

KERBEROS; for SSO
kerberos uses KDC.
KDC; 2 Services for granting access
TGT; requests ticket to TGS

SSID; The name you see in list when connecting to wifi
BSS; 1 AP radio serving clients
BSSID; The unique Identifier of 1 AP, based on radio/hardware
ESS; Multiple BSSs in the same SSID enabling roaming/coverage
ESSID;The same as SSID but whole network across APs
If client connects to SSID w/ multiple BSS or ESS, it tries to determine which BSSID has the best signal range.
DRS; Dynamic Rate Switching. To adjust data rates based on signal.
Strong signal = High Data Rate
Low Signal = Low Data rate
Signal strength; Ratio of measurement of 1mW 0dBm = 1 mW. 
RSSI; Received Signal Strength Indicator. Measures signals on client end. Closer 0 = Better
-30 = Perfect, -60 = good, -80 = Bad
SNR; Measures Signal Strength and Background Noise
High SNR = Better.

Wireless survey; making sure WLANs cover whole physical locations and all have data rates.
Heat Map; show areas with bad signal = Orange/red
And Good signal = Green/Yellow

802.11r; Allows for auto reauthentication. Information quicker transitions
Roaming should be seamless. Many adapters supporting “aggressiveness”
Beacon Frames; Advertising WLAN APs, using Beacon Frames. Sent every 100ms 

WDS; Wireless Distribution System. APs connect wirelessly without cabling. WDS must use the same SSID, Security and Channel. APs configured in repeater mode.

Wireless Controller; Centralized and monitoring of all APs, dedicated hardware appliance.
Autonomous AP; Smart, Has firmware, doesn’t need Controller
Lightweight AP; Requires Controller to Function.
Cisco Wireless Controller; Uses LWAPP allows light weight APs to automatically configure SSID, Security, standards and Channel alternatives; CAPWAPP
Omnidirectional; Radiate equally all direction
Vertical rod
Unidirectional; Focused on 1 direction. Sender and receive must use directional antennas
Yagi, Parabolic Dish/Grid
Gain dB; Measures signal Amplification
Narrow Beam; 10 very directional
Wire Beam; 90 Less directional
Polarization; Orientation of the Waves propagating from the antennas
Dual Polarization; Can be installed in either direction. Best way to support mobile as these can be help by their user in a variety of orientations.


Other Wireless Network Types
Most Enterprise and SoHo networks use Infrastructure mode, but there are ways of wireless connection to establish peer-to-peer connections.
Ad Hoc; Wireless Adapters allows connection from other adapters, not needing an AP Called (Independent Basic Service Set) IBSS, Must be within range. 
Mesh; WMN. Unlike ad-hoc, nodes are capable of peering, and doesn’t need to be in range. Can perform path discovery and forwarding (Mesh Basic Service Set) so no range is needed
Point-To-Point; Physical and logical Connection between two devices. A wireless point-to-point link usually is used in bridging where cables are not possible. Two endpoints only.

802.11 - > better known as Wifi, defines layer 1 

802.11a; 54 Mbps, 5 Ghz uses OFDM 
802.11b; 11 Mbps, 2.4 GHz uses CCK and DSSS for signal encoding
802.11b overlaps quite considerably, this means CCI is real.
Non overlapping channels; 1,6 and 11.
802.11g; 54 Mbps, 2.4 Ghz, uses OFDM compatible with 802.11b
802.11n; also known as WiFi 4, New technology;
MIMO -> Multiple antennas to handle multiple signals; using notation
AxB;C 
A; Transmit B; Receive C; Simultaneous Transmit and receive.
Channel Bonding; Two adjacent channels combined into two, Wifi 4 allows for (40 MHz)
WiFi 4 allows for 72 Mbps per stream link.
802.11ac; Also known as WiFi 5, The goal of WiFi 5 is to reach Gigabits speeds.
Only 5 Ghz
Channel bonding for up to 80 Mhz or 160 Mhz. 8 spatial streams rather than 4.
1 Gbps
802.11 uses VHT.
Wifi 5 values are marketed using AC values. AC5300 represents 1 Gbps over 40 Mhz channel
802.11ax; 2.4 Ghz, 5 Ghz, 6 Ghz, 10 Gigabits. Also marketed as AX1100
6 Ghz; Highest Speeds 
Wifi 6 uses better modulation also called as high efficiency (HE)
Wifi 6 uses OFDMA, which lets a single channel be split into smaller pieces called Resource Units (RU)
Small RU -> lower speed but allows for more device to connect Large RU; Higher speed for devices
Wifi 6 supports Wifi 5 and Wifi 4 APs.

Definition words; 
MIMO; Multiple Input Multiple Output, Multiple antennas to handle multiple signals
OFDM; A modulation technique that splits data across many closely spaced sub-carriers to improve efficiency and reduce interference.
OFDMA; An extension of OFDM that allows multiple devices to transmit simultaneously by dividing a channel into smaller sub-channels.
Channel bonding; Combining two or more adjacent channels into one wider channel to increase data throughput.
RU; Resource Units; A subdivision of a Wi-Fi 6 channel used in OFDMA to allocate bandwidth to different devices.
MIMO; One device at a time, multiple antennas/streams for that device.
MU-MIMO; Multiple devices simultaneously 1 antennae multiple devices
6 Ghz; for higher speeds.


802.11a; 54 Mbps, 5 Ghz and OFDM
802.11b; 11 Mbps, 2.4 Ghz, Signal encoding CCK and DSSS
802.11g; 54 Mbps, 2.4 Ghz, OFDM and compatible with 802.11b
802.11n; Wifi 4. 72 Mbps, 2.4 Ghz and 5 Ghz, MIMO, and channel bonding up to 40 MHz
802.11ac;Wifi 5. 2,167 Mbps, 5 Ghz, MU-MIMO, Uses VHT, Channel bonding; up to 80 and 160 Mhz. AP’s are marketed as AC5300; representing 1 Gbps over 40 Mhz.
802.11a; Wifi 6, 2.4, 5 Ghz and 6 Ghz Also marketed as AX11000 
6 Ghz Highest speeds.
Wifi 6 uses better modulation as high efficiency (HE)
MU-MIMO
Wifi 6 Uses OFDMA which lets a single channel be separated into smaller pieces
Called (RU) Resource Units
Smaller RUs -> lower speed Larger RUs -> higher speed for device
Wifi 6 allows for 10G speed 

CSMA/CA; To cope with contention, CTS (Clear to Send) Then all stations do not attempt to transmit within that time period.

2.4 Ghz; Better at penetrating materials Meaning Longer Range, However Less individual Channels
5 Ghz; Less efficient at penetrating materials meaning Shorter Range, However More individual Channels

Overlap;
2.4 Ghz; Channels that don’t overlap; Channel 1, 6 and 11. This means CCI is real.

802.11h; Uses DFS to scan for radar signals, to avoid interference with radar and cellular communications in 5 GHz

MIMO Notation;
AxB:C
A; Transmit
B;Receive   C; Simultaenous
MI-MIMO; 
DL MUMIMO = WiFi 5, can support up to 6 stations
UL MUMIMO = WiFi 6, can support up to 8 stations


Band Steering; 
Most Wi-Fi devices have dual band. Or Tri-band (2.4,5,6 Ghz) radios Band steering allows an access point to make it more likely that client connects to 5 Ghz or 6 Ghz instead of 2.4 Ghz Band.

Cellular Technologies
Cellular radio establishes connection with nearest available cell or base stations.
Range; 5 m or 8 kilometers.
4G/LTE; Maximum DL of 150 Mbps in theory, but real world 20 Mbps.
LTE-A; Max 300 Mbps DL, but real world 90 mbps.
5G; 5G needs hundreds of small antennas, rather than a single large one. Called a Massive MIMO
Max 20G, real world, 300 Mbps

Satellite Technologies; satellites uses a microwave dish to align to orbital satelites
GEO; Higher Latency. Geostationary orbit much far from earth. Installed using VSAT
LEO; Lower Latency. Low Earth orbit. Much closer from the earth, however, u need to realign it periodically unlike GEO.

Spine and leaf topology
is good for supporting east-west traffic, and use of SDN and overlay networks.
Spine; Backbone. Backbone of Top-Tier Distribution switches.
Leaf; Access switches, each connected to the spine, however not connecting to each leaf.
No loops STP NOT needed, Uses ECMP; to distribute traffic between links.
ToR; Top of Rack Switches, Used in leaf. These switches are fast AF. 40/100 Gbps Uplink.

Storage Area networks are commonly used in Data centers to Provisions access to storage devices using block input/output (I/O) a San is isolated from the main network. It is only accessed by servers.

SAN has a mix of supporting stuff; like it can support RAID, tape libraries, etc. allowing for supported fabrics. It has a variety of fabrics. Can integrate different types of storage.

SAN Fabrics;

Fibre Channel; Uses Fiber cables but doesn't]’t rely on it. A SAN based on Fibrechannel Switched Fabric (FC-SW) Involves 3 main types of components;
Initiator; Servers with HBA (host Bus Adapter) jhas access to the SAN.
Target; A fabric. The Storage Device, can include; Raid ARRAYS, Tape drives and tape libraries, etc. They are divided into logical volumes and identified by LUNs.
LUN ; 64 Bit logical Unit Number
The initiator will use SCSI, SAS, SATA or NVMe commands to operate the storage devices in network, depending on which interface they support.
FC Switch; Provides the connection between initiator and targets. High performance FC switches are often referred to as directors. 

Fibre channels can use rates from 1GFC (1 Gbps) up to 128 GFC. Fibre Channel uses dedicated SFP+ and QSFP and twinax modular transceivers. Fibrechannels are ethernet transceivers can’t match.

The intiators and targets are identified by 64 bit WorldWide Names (WWN) Similar to network adapter MAC address. Initators and targets are allocated their own WWN, referred to as WWNN. also each port on them can have its own WWPN
WWN; Uniquely identify initators or targets
WWPN; Ports can also have identifiers!
WWNN; WWN allocated.

As most SANs now depend on use of fast, highly parallel SSDs, the NVMe specification is typicalyl preferred over the older SCSI interface. Using NVMe in a networked environment is referred to as NVMe over Fabrics NVMe-oF. NVMe over FC.

Converged Ethernet; 
The reason for using fibre channel fabric over standard ethernet is that SAN has QoS mechanisms to ensure flow control and guaranteed delivery. A new iteration of ethernet is referred to as lossless ethernet, data center ethernet, or converged enhanced ethernet has been developed as an alternate SAN Fabric

FCoE; Encapsulates FC Over Ethernet Pakcets. FCoE requires 10/40/100G adapters that combine NIC and HBA, ← Reffered to as CNA (Converged Network Adapter)

RCoE; NVMe overe RDMA. Better than NVMe/FC as it offloads storage transfers from CPU

A more Modern option is nvmE over Remote directory memory access RDMA. over converged Ethernet RoCE. RDMA is a way of offloading storage transfers from CPU and OS to improve performance and NVMe / FC 

TCP/IP 
iSCI = IP tunnelling protocol that enables transfers over iSCSI. iSCSI is used to link data over SANs but is also seen as alternative to fibre channel or converged Ethernet. As it works with regular ethernet Adapters and switches.

Overlay network; logical links between nodes
VXLAN; Uses layer 2 encapsulation that runs over L3.
Parts of VXLAN
VNI; 24 bitt to allocate a VXLAN (16 million VXLANS)
VTEP; Endpoint, tunnels VNI, encapsulates VNI.

EVPN; Ethernet VPN uses BGP to advertise eVXLAN networks and nodes as routers. EVPN is an alternative to VNI and VTEP 
(VNI is manual) 

DCI; Data center interconnect. Interconnecting data centers using VXLAN and EVPN
EVPN allows to discover MAC address and forward them.

RAS; Remote Access Server; server or network device that allows users to connect to a private network from a remote location.
Encrypted packet → secure connection

Host-to-Host → 1:1 computer
Site-to-Site → network to network
U install device inside a LAN (on both ends) to act as gateway 

Remote Access →single user to network
VPN concentrator in Premises end. 
Uses VPN client (software) <- the host installs software


Clientless → Remote Access without software


Methods for encapsulating;
PPP; Used serial communications to encapsulate, meaning it Encapsulates on Data Link Layer, common for WAN Links and older dial up connections.

GRE; Encapsulates IP Packets. When moved around next hop routers it is in L2, the routers only looks at  Outer GRE, until it’s finally on destination Router. And then decapsulates it.
Outer GRE; A packet  that has Ip src and IP Header.
IP Security; Internet Protocol Security (IPSec) also operates at the Network layer of the OSI model to authenticate hosts and encrypt packets. IPSec is used with other protocols to provide connection security, and it is increasingly used as a standalone VPN protocol.
TLS/DTLS; Another encapsulating method, but can add extra overhead because it already works on Session Layer.

AH; Authenticates and Integrity by calculating ICV (making sure the payload has not been modified) 
ESP; Encrypts the entire payload. Has header, trailer (extra padding for cryptography) and ICV Unlike AH, ESP excludes IP header when calculating ICV.

! With ESP, algorithms for both confidentiality (symmetric cipher) and authentication/integrity (hash function) are usually applied together. It is possible to use one or the other

IPSec Two Modes;
Transport; IP headers not encrypted, just payload.
Tunnel; payload encrypted and IP header is hidden to, is encapsulated as datagram with new IP header.

IKE; Authenticates before using AH or ESP. 
Two phases of IKE; 
Phase 1; Establishes identity of two peers and performs key agreement. Using diffie-helman algorithm to make secure channel
Two methods of authenticating peers; 
Digital certificates; mutually trusted certificate authority to identify one another
PSK; Passphrase
Phase 2; Uses secure channel created in phase 1 to establish which ciphers and key sizes will be used with AH and/ESP in IP sec session.

Two Version of IKE:
IKE Version 1; for site-to-site and host-to-host topologies and requires a supporting protocol to implement remote access VPNS.
IKEv2; Has additional features that have made the protocol popular for use as stand alone remote access client-to-Site VPN solutions. The main changes are following;
-Support EAP, ex; user authentication against a RADIUS server.
-Provides a simple setup mode that reduces bandwidth without compromising security
-Allow for NAT and MOBIKE multihoming
Multihoming means that a smartphone client with Wi-Fi and cellular interfaces can keep the IPsec connection alive when switching between them.
MOBIKE = Mobility and Multihoming Protocol It’s an extension to IKEv2 that lets an IPsec VPN survive IP address changes.
L2TP; L2TP is a Layer 2 tunneling protocol used to carry PPP frames over an IP network.
